---
layout: travel
title: Ecuador & Galápagos Islands - 
description: Travel notes
modified: 2015-09-26
categories: travel
comments: true
image:
  thumb: travel/Ecuador-PinnacleRock-th.jpg
mapping:
  locations:
    - title: Quito
      latitude: 
      longitude: 
    - title: Quilotoa crater lake
      latitude: 
      longitude: 
    - title: San Cristobal
      latitude: 
      longitude: 
    - title: Santa Cruz
      latitude: 
      longitude: 
    - title: Bartolome Island
      latitude: 
      longitude: 
    - title: Isabella Island
      latitude: 
      longitude: 
    - title: Kicker Rock
      latitude: 
      longitude: 
    - title: Baños
      latitude: 
      longitude: 
    - title: Montanita
      latitude: 
      longitude: 
---

We opted to fly from Colombia into Ecuador, favouring the 1hr 40m flight into the capital, Quito, over the ~30hr bus alternative. Being right on the equator I had expected, perhaps naively, that Ecuador would be hot and humid. However, Quito is the highest official capital city in the world, sitting at 2,850m above sea level and there was snow on the tops of the mountains. I had been wearing thongs, shorts, tshirts or singlets pretty much everyday for almost 6 months and now all of a sudden we had to put that stuff away and get out the warm clothes that had been packed away at the bottom of our backpacks.

We joined the free walking tour of Quito the following morning to help us get to know our way around the city. It started with a wander through the markets where we met the local ladies selling exotic fruits and vegetables and purchased a delicious fresh mora (mulberry) and coconut juice. We were then lead through the city by the friendly and knowledgeable local guide learning about its history as we visited its various plazas, churches and the main square.

The equator is not far from Quito, marking the middle of the world and the point where after spending the last eight months travelling within the Northern Hemisphere I would be crossing back into the same half of the world as Australia. In 1936 the government built a monument to represent this landmark only for it to be recently revealed, with the help of GPS equipment, that it was built in the wrong spot. To be fair, being 240m off was impressively close given the less accurate measuring instruments of this time. Nevertheless, for the nearby property, and actual location of the equator, this was a gift dropped in their lap and they capitalised on this by turning the property into a tourist attraction. This real Mitad del Mundo (Middle of the world) has set up various exhibitions to demonstrate the effects of the equator along with several 0º 0' 0'' signs throughout complete with a "calculated with GPS" line below in what might be a subtle dig at the government's gaffe. A tub of water was emptied on one side of the equator and it swirled in a clockwise direction and, just like an episode of the Simpsons, the same tub was emptied a few metres on the other side in the opposite hemisphere swirled anticlockwise. Water emptied right on the line emptied without any swirl. Other experiments demonstrated the impacts of balance and gravity on the equator as well as explained the Earth's equatorial bulge meaning the Earth is wider at its centre. We spent the afternoon taking photos and, like any normal person would do, jumping back and forth between hemispheres.

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-Equator.jpg" title="Standing in both the Northern and Southern Hemisphere. Latitude 0º 0' 0" %}

Ecuador is located on the infamous [Ring of Fire](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ring_of_Fire) where a large number of earthquakes and volcanic eruptions occur. Cotopaxi volcano is located just south of Quito and is considered the highest active volcano in the world. Visible from much of the city on a clear day we were surprised to learn that in April this year it began to show signs of unrest and came back to life. A major eruption of ash and steam occurred as recently as August and for the whole time we were in the area it was sending smoke into the air.

We got out of the city for the day and took a trip to Laguna De Quilotoa, a huge volcano crater lake. At a height of near 4,000m at the rim, the altitude made the weather cold and windy. However, as we descended the sandy path towards the lake surface the temperature heated up dramatically making for a much longer and difficult walk back out.

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-Quilotoa.jpg" title="Quilotoa crater lake" %}

Late one afternoon we rode the Telefériqo cable car, lifting us high into the mountains for a great view overlooking the city and the highest point of the trip so far at 4,100m. This put into perspective just how big the city of Quito is, home to 2.7 million people and extending as far as the eye can see in every direction.

##Galápagos Islands

The Galapagos Islands had been one of the must do places from the start and the excitement only grew as we met people over the past months that had already been. Situated 1000km from the coast of Ecuador, their remote and isolated location places them at the junction of three different ocean currents and at the centre of ongoing seismic and volcanic activity. This environment has lead to the development of unusual and unique plant and animal life both in the water and on land and inspired Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection. The islands are considered a living museum and showcase of evolution with 97% of the area declared National Park leaving only the remaining 3% to human settlements.

We flew out of Quito and after a short stop in Guayaquil landed on the island of San Cristobal. Lauren had posted a photo of our boarding passes and entry permit on Facebook at the airport before boarding and by chance some friends we had made on our trip through the San Blas Islands happened to see it. They were just finishing up their stay in the Galapagos and had plenty of helpful info to share. Just as we had intended to do they had crammed as much as they could into their stay. With no accommodation booked we headed to their hostel and managed to get the same cheap rate they were paying. At sealevel we were back to boardshort weather and within an hour of landing we were already hanging out with sea lions on the beach of La Loberia.

Animals in the Galapagos do not see humans as a threat, nor do they show any fear from our presence. Having lived for many years peacefully without humans, or even mostly without predators, they live in a paradise of animals and we're nothing more than a curiosity. On a daily basis we walked paths through hundreds of iguanas laying in the sun and strolled right up to birds and resting sea lions to take a photo with few, if any, even bothering to move.

That first afternoon, on recommendation from the hostel owner, we walked to Tijeretas, a quiet and protected bay with clean, clear water. We jumped in with snorkels and had been swimming for only a couple of minutes when I spotted a turtle and called Lauren over. We followed it until a playful sea lion pup found us and wanted our attention, so much so that it swam circles around the turtle until it went away. We were the only ones in the water and swam with it for over an hour. It was so curious coming right up to our faces before darting away encouraging us to follow. I dove down doing twists and backflips underwater as it copied me getting more and more excited the more I played with it. People were standing on the cliffs watching us, their attention drawn by the sound of Lauren squealing with excitement through her snorkel. It was getting dark and we were shivering so we reluctantly said goodbye to our little friend and got out of the water. Considering our plane had only landed at 1pm that afternoon we were already in love with the place and if the rest of our stay was even half as exciting as that first afternoon we would've been happy.

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-Tijeretas.jpg" title="People swimming in the bay of Tijeretas" %} 

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-SeaLion.jpg" title="Backflips with sea lion pups" %}

Early the next morning we caught a boat over to the island of Santa Cruz. Given majority of the action in the Galapagos happens on the water, including these 2+ hour island transfers, anybody that suffers from sea sickness could be forgiven for being anxious. It can get quite rough especially once you hit the open ocean but thankfully we were both fine and I found having chewing gum helped a lot. 

Not wanting to waste any daylight hours we found some accommodation, dropped our bags and hired some snorkels for the day. Along with day trips there are plenty of free activities that can also be enjoyed around the islands. Our first stop, Las Grietas, was a short water taxi and then walk away. It is a deep swimming hole that runs through the base of volcanic crevices that were formed during the cooling of molten lava and is a mixture of fresh mountain water and salt water. We swam through the thin channel and climbed over the rocks at the opposite end to reach an empty pool on the other side, and after swimming through that a third pool over the next set of rocks. They were much deeper, and quieter, without the lifejacket wearing tour groups that were flailing around in the first pool. We swam around taking photos and playing in the clear, refreshing water and I dove down following bigger fish and exploring the rocks and caves on the bottom.

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-LasGrietas.jpg" title="Las Grietas" %}

After a brief stop for lunch we set off walking to Tortuga Bay for the afternoon, a scenic yet lengthy stroll along a path scattered with the interesting looking prickly pear cactus trees and then further along the beach. We spotted many marine iguanas along the way, both on the sand and coming in to shore through the waves to lay spread out in the sun, occasionally spitting a stream of salt water out in front of them having filtered it for ingestion. They too, like many other plants and animals on the islands are not found anywhere else in the world and have adapted to the environment to flourish with few predators.

When it came to the nights we were both exhausted after the early starts and long, active and eventful days filled with lots of swimming, snorkelling and walking. We were often fighting to not fall asleep at the dinner table before retiring to the room to bed, satisfied that we had got the most we could out of the day and location.

Bartolome Island has an unusual landscape made up of red and orange volcanic rock contrasted with dark blue water. We picked a day tour and after a bus ride across Santa Cruz the group eagerly boarded a fancy boat to take us the two hours over to Bartolome. Upon arrival we followed the path from the shore, climbing the stairs high up the mountain lookout for a panoramic view of the island and its most recognisable sight, Pinnacle Rock, the most representative landmark of the Galapagos. Despite the islands being relatively close together, their landscapes varied greatly and with an extinct volcano and treeless, barren land as far as you could see Bartolome was like we were on another planet.  

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-Bartolome.jpg" title="Unusual landscape of Bartoleme Island" %}

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-PinnacleRock.jpg" title="Looking down at Pinnacle Rock" %}

Back down at the water it was time for a much needed swim and we dived off the boat with our snorkels to cool down and explore. There were schools of brightly coloured fish everywhere we looked and we even swam with an iguana as it made its way to lay on a rock in the sun. We had a late seafood lunch with the group on the deck before the boat made its way back to Santa Cruz.

The following day we took off on another tour, this time on a day trip to Santa Fe for another busy day of snorkelling. We first stopped in deep water and I dove down to swim through large schools of fish with the camera before we moved around into the bay to play with the baby sea lions in front of their colony. The pups are really curious and the most fun to swim with as they enjoy playing underwater with us, copying our every move and even cheekily coming up close and blowing bubbles for the camera. While in the water we were also lucky to be able to tick off more animal sightings as we swam up close with stingrays, turtles and white tip sharks. After lunch we swam at yet another beautiful beach and walked along the white sand exploring and taking photos of the marine iguanas and sally lightfoot crabs. Much to our excitement we completed an already wildlife filled tour with several humpback whales popping up beside the boat as we made our way back.

El Chato is a tortoise reserve in the highlands of Santa Cruz island where hundreds of tortoises roam free. These days the tortoises are a protected species and are safe from humans, once their primary predator, and can live up to 150 years old. We took a taxi to the reserve and walked around taking photos of the large tortoises as they slowly moved around eating the grass. You could not look in any direction without spotting at least one and we even had our path stubbornly blocked forcing us into the shrub to get past. Our friendly taxi driver chose to come with us instead of wait in the car and happily lead us around armed with google translate on his phone. We followed as he also walked us through the long underground lava tunnels formed by flowing lava leaving cave-like channels in the rock deep below the now tortoise reserve.

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-TortoiseReserve.jpg" title="Old tortoise at El Chato" %} 

Isabella Island was another of our stops, containing six volcanoes and is the largest of all the islands combined. We wasted no time getting off the transfer boat and found both accommodation and a tour that was leaving in just over an hour. After a quick lunch we left on the tour to Las Tintoreras where we joined some others on a small boat and were taken to a nearby island. We spotted some more marine iguanas, white tipped sharks and our first lot of Galapagos penguins, endemic to the area and adapted to be the only penguin to live north of the equator in the wild.

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-Penguin.jpg" title="Galapagos penguin" %}

We went snorkelling yet again and swam with around 10 huge sea turtles as they peacefully moved around us not bothered by our presence as we took photos. On landing back at Isabella, we held on to the snorkelling gear and went back in just off the side of the wharf. Lauren found a sea lion pup that wanted to play hide and seek around the mangroves and wharf. I watched on as they chased each other, the sea lion sneakily hid behind objects before racing right up to her face and darting away at the last second. I jumped in and we were joined by a penguin that wanted to swim with us too, coming right up close to the camera. 

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-SeaTurtle.jpg" title="Giant sea turtle" %}

The islands feature not only many varieties of marine life but also birds. We got a lift with a local guy asking him to take us inland to a lake where the flamingos feed and we stayed at the edge waiting for the perfect moment to get a photo with their heads our of the water.

Isabella Island is home to five different types of turtles along with a tortoise breeding centre, established to protect this unique species and bring them back from the brink of extinction. Without the threat of humans or introduced animals these tortoises can grow to reach 150 years old, meaning someone who sees a tortoise get born will not live to see it grow to full size. We walked around the breeding centre watching the hundreds of tortoises of varying ages and sizes laying in the sun.

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-Tortoise.jpg" title="Old wise tortoise" %}

Los Tuneles is another popular day trip from Isabella which had us waking up early and taking a boat out to our first stop to see the canals in the lava rocks with tunnels, bridges and caves formed by lava flow many many years ago. We disembarked, climbing up the edge of the sharp volcanic rock to see a harsh, barren landscape of jagged rocks and dry cacti. We had stopped to see the blue-footed booby, an interesting looking bird with electric blue feet. There were many nesting in the area and we watched on as the males attempted to attract a female mate by stamping and dancing to show off their blue feet.

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-Boobys.jpg" title="Blue-footed boobies dancing" %}

We got into the water with snorkels and explored the underwater tunnels, home to many brightly coloured fish, sea horses, sharks and turtles. Some of the turtles are so large that when Lauren swam above one to compare it was the size of her. 	

Our final stop was back on San Cristobal where we would spend our last remaining days before flying back to the mainland. There was plenty more snorkelling to be done and we went back to our two favourite spots from the first day and were not surprised when we found yet again many more turtles and sea lions to swim with. After snorkelling daily the initial thrill of discovering these animals may have slightly dropped but they were just as entertaining as we swam together for hours and took hundreds of photos from all different angles. 

Lauren was lucky to have her birthday fall on our last full day and we had saved one of the best day trips to celebrate. We landed on the empty Cerro Brujo beach and were blown away by its amazing blue water and white sand, it was like being inside a computer wallpaper.

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-CerroBrujo.jpg" title="Cerro Brujo beach" %}

We quickly found a spot on the sand to drop our bags and went straight into the water to swim. We have learned during our travels that coming from Australia we have surprisingly high standards in comparison to others when it comes to being impressed by beaches but this was one of, if not the nicest beaches I had ever seen. It was free from footsteps and we were lucky enough to be sharing it with only a small group from our boat and some sea lions who had wandered out of the water to greet us.

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-CerroBrujoLauren.jpg" title="Not a bad way to spend your birthday.. Lauren making friends" %}

Despite its beauty, the main drawcard for the tour is not the beach but a snorkelling trip out to Kicker Rock, an impressive looking rock formation sitting in the middle of the ocean and standing 150m out of the water. We were dropped in deep water and snorkelled through the 22m deep channel between the rock. Compared to previous days of snorkelling this was in the open ocean and which was rougher and not for the weak swimmer. We were there in the hope of seeing **bigger things** and the depth and remoteness of the spot very much felt like we were guests in their territory. I dove down deep, perhaps too deep, equalising my ears multiple times as I went down and was rewarded with the sight of huge sea turtles floating along in silence well below the turbulent surface. I swam down through schools of thousands of fish, so dense and unbothered by my presence that my surroundings went completely dark as I swam through the middle. Coming out the other side, I was not the only one interested in the fish as I spotted numerous Galápagos sharks lurking in the darkness. I dove down and followed a shark with the GoPro as it swam right through the middle of the school, getting a little too close for comfort but determined to get both a good photo and interesting video footage. We both agreed that this trip has set high expectations on any future snorkelling and it will take something pretty special in the water to impress us from now on.

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-GalapagosShark.jpg" title="Galápagos shark" %}

We were happy with our approach to tackle the Galapagos on our own, opting to island hop and tailor our 8 day visit around the many places and animals we wanted to see. The Galapagos Islands are not typically on a backpackers itinerary due to cost constraints and whilst it could have been far cheaper for us had we not packed so much into our stay and taken so many day tours it could also have been much more expensive if we had taken the cruise route. We saw it as a once in a lifetime opportunity and it was never something we had considered skipping knowing we were already in that part of the world. It is truly an amazing and unbelievable place and after taking in excess of 2000 photos during that time it really is a photographers heaven. Everyday felt like a National Geographic documentary and it has been a definite highlight in my already crowded list over the past 8 months of travel.

##Baños

Back on the mainland we landed in Quito to spend the night before making our way to a town in the mountains called Baños. Amusingly, its name translates to "bathroom" or "toilet", and being the childless yet dad-joke wielding comedian that I am I found it difficult to let this go unnoticed. Far from a shitty place to visit, instead we found a friendly and welcoming town quite different to Quito. It was surrounded by farmland, green mountains and flowing waterfalls and offered many quality cafes, bars and restaurants. 

One of the most popular activities in Baños is the Ruta de las Cascadas (The waterfall route) consisting of almost a dozen waterfalls set out over a 17km stretch of road and commonly seen by hiring mountain bikes and riding between them at your own pace, stopping for photos along the way. We set off riding in the morning with a map and plans to follow the road passing the many waterfalls and tunnels to one of the largest waterfalls in the area, Pailon del Diablo. Along the way we also stopped to ride in one of the many home-made cable cars locals have set up along the route to carry people high across the gorge in front of the waterfall to get a closer look.

After a long day of bike riding, that night was the perfect opportunity to soak our sore muscles with the locals in one of the many hot springs. Located below a waterfall the pools are fed by hot water heated by volcanic activity deep below the Earth's surface. The pools are a popular social activity for locals, especially at night, and we moved within the multiple pools testing the varying temperatures from freezing cold to scalding hot.

Ecuador's hallmark candy is Melcocha (taffy) and the majority of it is made in Baños from the local sugar cane. It comes in all sorts of colours and fruity flavours with my favourites being guanabana and mora. It can be seen being made in store fronts throughout the town with large quantities being pulled, stretched and beaten against sturdy door frames to obtain the right consistency.

With a spare afternoon we hired a buggy to explore both the town and surrounds, following winding roads along clifftops without guard rails and stopping to look down at the rivers and waterfalls far below. I drove manically around the town speeding up for speedhumps and taking advantage of any patch of dirt I could find. The highlight though was Lauren announcing:

```"I'm turning the GoPro off, it encourages you to be silly"```

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-Buggy.jpg" title="Exploring the town by buggy" %}

With plenty of scenic views around Baños we took the hostel owners suggestion and followed his basic map up a steep bush path for an hour to reach a lookout over the town. Not ready to turn back we continued uphill in hope of reaching La Casa Del Arbol, and its famous swing perfectly positioned for photos high in the mountains. Without much of an idea where to go we followed the road until meeting a farmer working at the front of his property. With so-so Spanish we asked how to get there on foot and were dishearteningly told it was a further 2.5 hours walk by road. Instead he pointed to a shortcut by way of a rugged bush track and said that it would be much quicker. 

We had heard of a property that had only recently built a much more extreme swing on the side of a cliff and decided to try and find that along the way. We followed the track and with the help of some more farmers managed to find the property. We were excited yet horrified at the sight of this huge swing perched on the edge of a cliff overlooking bush and farmland hundreds of metres below. Another couple watching on informed us they had changed their minds and pulled out which meant we had no one to watch beforehand. Thankfully, the owner chose Lauren to go first, fitting her into a harness and whisking her out onto the platform despite her pleas for a safety briefing first. Lauren's squeal overpowered my laughter as the platform dropped and she was sent racing out over the valley. I was up next and after surviving the initial swing out I enjoyed having my legs dangle freely as I swung back and forth high above the ground. Surprisingly we didn't pay until we were safely back on land which is a terrible business model had we of slipped off.. Even then it only cost us $5 each which led me to wonder just how much of their setup budget had been allocated towards safety and testing.

Tired of walking, we asked the owner if she could drive us the rest of the way to La Casa Del Arbol. We spent the rest of the afternoon on the much tamer, but more known, swing admiring the views overlooking Baños and posing for photos.

{% include image.html img="images/travel/Ecuador-CasaDelArbol.jpg" title="Playing on the Swing at the edge of the world" %}  

##Montanita

Our last stop in Ecuador was Montanita, a popular party town on the pacific coast. By day the beach is filled with sunbeds for hire and small carts selling ceviche and freshly squeezed juice. After the sun goes down the town transforms with the nightlife centred around "cocktail alley" a pedestrian street lined with stalls selling cheap cocktails from 10 to 20 page menus filled with any cocktail or mixed drink you could imagine. The streets are flooded with people out to party as the stalls pump music all night competing for customers. At night we hopped between stalls, ordering many different drinks and talking with people sitting on the chairs provided by each stall.

We left Montanita late one afternoon to catch an overnight bus across the border and into Peru. If there is to be one positive about reaching a border crossing at 2am and having to sleepily get out and go through border control it's that there are no crowds. It ended up being one of the quickest borders so far with the exiting Ecuador and entering Peru desks right next to each other with no bag checks or even questions.
